Hello.
Welcome to God Day, and this is Derek Walker, the pastor of the Oxford Bible Church.
Good to be with you.
I want to share today on the wonderful subject of messianic prophecy.
That is, all the prophecies of the Messiah, the coming Messiah, from the beginning of time.
Once man fell, God began giving a portrait of the coming champion, God's champion, the Messiah, who would
save mankind and ultimately restore mankind to in the kingdom of God.
And Messianic prophecy is one of the wonderful proofs that the Bible is the word of God.
I remember when I became a Christian, I heard the message and I thought this is so amazing that God became a man in the person of Jesus Christ.
And then I studied for the evidence of it and studied the evidence of the resurrection.
And one thing that was also very convincing to me was all the prophecies, these messianic prophecies that Jesus fulfilled in his life.
It was amazing.
And we don't have time to get into all of those now.
But I want to share some key principles
to help you understand messianic prophecy.
And one of them is called the sufferings and the glory.
Basically, there are two different types of vision of the coming Messiah that is given in the Old Testament and in the prophets.
The coming Messiah is described in two very different ways.
First, that he would come in humility as a suffering servant.
He would come to
to suffer and die for our sins and for our salvation.
And then there's another set of prophecies that describe him coming in power and glory as the king, the conquering king to reign on earth.
Totally different.
And when those prophecies are together, if you read it carefully, it's always the suffering Messiah first and then the glorious Messiah, not the other way around.
And so
These prophets saw his sufferings as our Savior and his glory, the glory that would follow as our King.
But it didn't define what kind of time period would be between those two.
Now, we know that actually Jesus fulfilled these two things through his two comings, which are about at least, anyway, 2,000 years apart.
He came the first time to suffer for our sin, and he'll come the second time as the glorious king.
And these images are so different that some Jews actually believe that there'd be two messiahs.
One would call the son of Joseph, who would be the suffering messiah, who would then ultimately be exalted.
And then the other one, they would call the son of David, who, like David, would be a conquering king.
Actually, though, the New Testament makes it clear that there is only one Messiah, but Jesus, and he will fulfill both aspects of the Messiah because he comes twice, the first time as the suffering Messiah, the second time as the conquering King.
And this two-fold nature of the Messiah corresponds actually to the two-fold program of God,
or the two programs of God, which I call the salvation program and the kingdom program.
So throughout history, God is fulfilling two programs, salvation and kingdom.
And a lot of people, when they read the Bible, they just think in terms of God's salvation and they ignore the large parts of the Bible that are about God's kingdom.
So I want to unpack that, you see, to understand
the kingdom program.
That's actually what comes first.
Originally God set up his kingdom and created the angels including Lucifer but then Lucifer rebelled against God, rebelled against God and set up his counter kingdom.
He took a third of the angels with him and so you've got this kingdom of darkness based on the lie and then God creates man.
in his image and to actually exercise dominion on the earth.
That man's purpose is to be in God's kingdom, under God's authority and imaging God, expressing God's nature and dominion in the earth.
And so man was to be part of God's kingdom program and
God's vision, as it were, was that his kingdom would cover the earth as man multiplied.
But man sinned and joined the enemy's kingdom and came under the kingdom of darkness.
And since then, there's been a war between God's kingdom and Satan's kingdom consisting of all those in rebellion against God.
The important thing to understand is that God is not a softie or a loser.
He has not changed his kingdom purpose and program.
He is still going to establish his kingdom on the earth and put all his enemies under foot.
You know, you can see that in Psalm 8, because Psalm 8 was written by David 3,000 years after the fall of man.
And so you might think God's ideal idea has failed.
You know, God wanted to establish His kingdom on earth, but man sinned, now it's all a mess.
But 3,000 years later, the psalm 8 is written as if the fall has not even happened.
God's purpose is still the same.
Psalm 8, verse 4, it says, What is man that you are mindful of him?
Or the son of man that you visit him?
For you have made him a little lower than the angels.
You have crowned him with glory and honour.
And you have made him to have dominion over the works of your hands.
You have put all things under his feet.
So God's kingdom program is still in place.
We aren't called to rule and reign with God.
And therefore, this is the first program of God is his kingdom program in which his kingdom is advancing step by step through the ages.
And it's going to be fulfilled through the Messiah.
and ultimately all his enemies are going to be put under his feet.
Now, people say, you know, why does God allow all this evil to happen?
God could have judged his enemies and destroyed the kingdom of darkness immediately.
But why is he delayed doing that?
Why does he allow evil to continue?
And the reason is that he
brought in his salvation program.
You see, when man's ined, if God would have immediately applied his kingdom program and judged mankind, then that would be the end of us.
There would be no hope for us.
But because God loved us, he put in place a second program called his salvation program that he would accomplish through the Messiah.
But that would take time.
We'll take time to prepare the way for the coming of the Messiah, for the Messiah to die and rise again and purchase our salvation.
And then for Him to call people to repentance and to put their trust in the Messiah.
And so God held back His kingdom program in order for the salvation program to work and save as many people as possible.
But ultimately, God is going to fulfill His kingdom program
Christ will return and establish his kingdom on the earth.
So there are two programs working together.
He wants to save as many as possible from destruction and he is going to establish his kingdom on the earth.
And that's why it says in 2 Peter 3.9, God, the Lord is not slack concerning his promise to establish his kingdom on the earth.
As some count
slackness, but is long suffering toward us, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance.
And so God is holding back his judgment and his kingdom in order to save as many people as possible, because when he actually does move in his kingdom power, then those who have not turned to him yet will actually come under judgment and then they will have no more hope of receiving salvation.
And so that's why Jesus had to first come as the suffering Messiah to fulfill the salvation program and make it possible for mankind to be saved before he comes in his glory.
So you see the two programs relate to the two aspects of the Messiah, his suffering and his glory.
And that's why the suffering for salvation has to happen before his coming in glory.
And so
That's why Jesus said, you know, when he rose from the dead, they didn't really understand.
The Jews were looking for the concrete Messiah because they were oppressed by the Romans.
So they weren't thinking that they needed a Messiah to save them from their sin, especially because they come under a false teaching of Phariseeism, legalism.
which gave the impression that you can save yourself by your works.
And so they thought, we just need to keep the law.
We don't need a, you know, we don't need a savior, a personal savior.
And they didn't realize that that was their main need.
All they saw is they need a political savior, a political messiah, who could save them from the Romans.
And that's one reason they didn't recognize Jesus when he came.
in his resurrection, even though his disciples were not understanding this.
And so he rebukes them in the resurrection that they haven't studied the Scripture well enough.
He said in Luke 24, 25, he says, oh, foolish ones, slow of heart to believe in all that the prophets have spoken, or not the Christ, the Messiah, to first have suffered these things.
Notice
He first needs to suffer these things and then to enter into his glory.
So he says, the glory will come, but first I had to suffer these things.
The beginning of Moses and all the script prophets, he expounded to them in all the scriptures, the things concerning himself.
And so Jesus is here claiming to be the suffering and the glorious Messiah.
but that he had to suffer first, be raised from the dead.
And then he would enter his glory.
And so he later said in Luke 24, about verse 45 to 47, he said, it is written and it was necessary for the Christ to suffer and then rise from the dead.
the third day and that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name.
So in other words, the salvation program requires that the Messiah must first suffer and die and that then the gospel go out to the nation so that people have a chance to be saved.
And so this is how we understand messianic prophecy.
Some of the prophecies are to do with his first coming in humility.
Other prophecies are to do with his second coming in power and glory.
The Jews missed it because they were looking for the glorious Messiah when, of course, he had to first of all come as the suffering Messiah.
And so notice he says, you need to read all the scriptures.
See, there's a tendency, isn't there, even with us?
and the Jews did the same thing, you cherry-pick the verses you like.
So they chose the verses about the conquering Messiah that suited them, and they ignored passages and still do, sadly, like Isaiah 53.
That talk about the suffering Messiah, the Savior from our sins.
And they ignored that.
When we read the Bible, we must read it systematically.
We mustn't just cherry-pick the bits we like, because that's how they actually, they missed it.
And so Jesus, he came, first of all, to die for our sins.
And Christians often just focus on that, and they ignore the other prophecies, which are the kingdom prophecies.
that the same Jesus who died for our sins is actually going to come again in power and glory and establish his kingdom on the earth.
And he will reign on earth for a thousand years.
And even from the fourth century, third and fourth, fourth century, the church rejected that idea.
They thought, well, all the prophecies of the kingdom are fulfilled in the church age.
There is no future kingdom of God on earth.
they rejected the prophecy.
So they accepted, they did the opposite of the Jews.
They accepted the prophecies of the suffering saviour, but then they rejected the kingdom prophecies.
But Jesus would rebuke that.
He would say, foolish ones.
You must believe all the Scriptures concerning the Messiah.
So because we're so aware of our need for salvation, we can assume the whole Bible is about salvation.
and miss God's kingdom program.
Actually, God's kingdom program, you can only understand the Bible in terms of God's kingdom program first.
That's God's original purpose for man.
And when sin came in, it disrupted that.
And so that called forth the salvation program, which is designed to bring man back into God's kingdom.
So
that we can fulfill God's original purpose of us ruling and reigning with Him as God's image, representing Him.
So the salvation program is a temporary addition to the kingdom program, but the kingdom program will continue forever and ever as God completes His kingdom purposes.
And so the purpose of salvation is to restore that man
back into his kingdom.
And so this tells us that sin is essentially rebellion against God's authority, against his kingdom.
That caused us to be kicked out of his kingdom.
So therefore, to be truly saved requires repentance from our rebellion against God's authority and a submission to Jesus as Lord.
So the two sides of the coin of salvation is, first of all, trusting in Christ as our Savior, who has purchased our salvation and provided the free pardon that we need to wipe the past clean.
We have to trust in Him as our Savior, and there's a repentance there, I suppose, of we must repent of trusting in our own works for salvation.
But also, there is a submission.
to Christ as our Lord.
We've got to be able to say from our heart, Jesus is my Lord.
And that is the faith that brings us back into God's kingdom when we are submitted under his authority.
Praise God.
That's a saving faith.
Some kind of faith, some kind of mental ascent that just says, well, I agree with the gospel and that Jesus, the Son of God, but there's no submission of the heart.
is not a saving faith.
Demons have that faith.
You know, saving faith involves a submission to the Lordship of Christ.
And so that is why we talk about Jesus being Lord and Savior.
And so both these programs actually center in the Messiah
and the original prophecy called the proto-evangelium in Genesis 3.15 took place immediately after the fall of man when God then announced to the devil.
He said, Genesis 3.15, I will put enmity between you Satan and the woman and between your seed and her seed.
So there will be a spiritual warfare between the seed of Satan, that's all those in his kingdom, angels, demons and people who are
of their father, the devil, who are in rebellion against God, who are embraced the lie of Satan that we are autonomous, not created by God.
We are our own God.
And on the other side is her seed, the seed of the woman.
That's the title of the Messiah, predicting that he would be born of a virgin.
And also in that, you could see yourself, if you're in Christ, you are in
the seed of the woman.
You are in Christ.
And so there's this battle between God's kingdom and Satan's kingdom.
And then it predicts the two aspects of what the Messiah would do.
It says, he, the Messiah, will crush your head, Satan.
Okay?
And that is the kingdom program that the Messiah is going to crush and destroy the power and the authority of the devil over mankind.
He's going to crush the enemy.
praise God.
And there's also a prediction of the salvation program because it says, and you, Satan, the serpent, you will bruise his heel.
So you can see what happened at the cross, that serpent, he will crush the serpent on the foot, but at the same time the serpent will bite the heel of the Messiah and inject the poison of sin
And on the cross, Jesus took the poison of sin on Himself.
He bore our sins.
He took the curse for our sins, praise God.
He paid the price for our sins and rose from the dead.
So this is a picture of salvation that He would take the poison of the serpent on Himself to set us free from it.
But at the same time, He would
crush him underfoot and in his resurrection he defeated and triumphed over all the powers of the enemy and now he has all authority in heaven and earth, hallelujah.
And one day he's going to enforce that authority and literally put all his enemies underfoot and they'll be thrown into the lake of fire.
And so he will accomplish his kingdom program.
And so these are the two aspects of
the salvation and the kingdom program, the sufferings and the glory.
And this is typified by two sons.
This is a major way of understanding the Bible, you see.
The two sons, the Messiah, when you start the New Testament in Matthew 1, it says that Christ is the son of Abraham and the son of David.
And so there are two pictures of him.
As the son of Abraham, the original
beloved son of Abraham was Isaac.
And so it's saying that the Messiah would be is pictured by Isaac.
Isaac, who was the willing sacrifice unto death, Abraham offered up Isaac to God and received him back from the dead on Mount Mariah.
And that is a picture of God's salvation program.
When Jesus was offered, you see, as the greater than Isaac,
He was offered as a sacrifice to God on Mount Mariah and then was received by the Father back from the dead.
And that was a picture.
So as the son of Abraham, the Messiah is a picture of the suffering Messiah being offered up for our salvation.
But also God said that the Messiah would be the son of David and the son of David
is pictured by the original son of David, Solomon, who reigned over a wealth, a prosperous, a peaceful, glorious kingdom.
And so Jesus even caught himself the greater than Solomon, a greater than Solomon is here.
So as the greatest son of David, Jesus is the one who is greater than Solomon.
Jesus is both the greater than Isaac and the greater
than Solomon.
These are the two pictures of the suffering Messiah who sacrificed himself for us in.
And the glorious Messiah, the son of David, the greater than Solomon, who would reign over a glorious kingdom.
And these two programs of God are also pictured by two animals, the lion and the lamb.
And of course, as the suffering Messiah,
Jesus is called the Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world, praise God.
But he's also the Lion of Judah.
Judah was the ruling tribe.
That was ordained in Genesis 49.10 that the Messiah would come through Judah and he would reign as a lion.
He is the Lion of Judah.
And that's a picture of him as the Kingly Messiah.
Revelation chapter 5 connects those images in one person.
If you go to verse 5, Revelation 5, verse 5, we see this wonderful revelation in the New Testament that the Lamb and the lion are the same person and His name is Jesus.
It says, but one of the elders, Revelation 5, 5 said to me, do not weep.
Behold, the lion of the tribe of Judah, the root of David has prevailed.
to open the scroll and to loose the seven seals and I looked and he's obviously expecting to see a lion and behold in the midst of the throne and the four living creatures in the midst of the elders stood a lamb.
So he looks to see the lion but this lion is also the lamb as though it had been saved which slain which means it's been slain but it's now risen again the risen lamb of God with seven horns and seven eyes
And that represents all authority, the seven horns are all authority, and the seven eyes which are the seven spirits of God sent out into the world.
And so we see that the suffering Messiah is the Lamb of God, and now he is exalted, praise God, and now he is the line of Judah.
And he, as the line of Judah in Revelation, he will
return to the earth in power and glory and it's going to happen soon I believe and he is going to reign on earth and we will rule and reign with him and so he's in revelation in the song they actually say he is worthy because he worthy is the lamb who was slain to receive all power and dominion and glory in other words because he
Humbled himself unto death as the Lamb of God.
So now he is worthy to rule as the Lion of Judah.
That's what Philippians 2, 5 to 11 says that because Jesus was obedient unto death, even death on the cross.
Therefore God has highly exalted him, given him the name above every name that at the name of Jesus, every knee will bow.
So right now he is received in his ascension, that name above every name.
And the day is coming.
when he will enforce that authority and every knee will bow, including all the seed of Satan.
Their knees are will bow before the king Messiah, the glorious Messiah.
And so this is a summary really of the prophecies.
And the final point thing I would point out is that the Abrahamic covenant is the foundational covenant and it was developed through three different covenants.
But let me just focus on two of them.
One of the covenants that developed from the Abrahamic covenant is the new covenant that Jesus brought for our salvation.
And through the new covenant in the blood of Jesus, we have salvation.
That's the suffering messiah, fulfilling the salvation program of God.
And there was another covenant that God made with David.
It's called the Davidic covenant that promised that there would be an everlasting son of David who would have an everlasting kingdom on earth.
And he would reign from the throne of David in Jerusalem.
That's the Davidic covenant.
And that will be fulfilled through the, that's the kingdom program.
That will be fulfilled through Jesus in the second coming.
He will come.
and he will reign over the earth from the throne of David in fulfillment of the Davidic covenant.
And so Jesus fulfills all the prophecies of the suffering Messiah and the glorious Kingly Messiah.
Praise to Jesus, amen.